JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
Gwen Ifill is away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
Every time I think about those
kids. it gets
me mad. And, by the way, it
happens on the
streets of Chicago everyday.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Obama
makes an emotional
appeal for background checks and
outlines
other actions to curb gun
violence.
Also ahead this Tuesday: how New
Hampshire
is grappling with a heroin
epidemic.
TED GATSAS (R), Mayor of
Manchester, New Hampshire:
We need to do something about
it. If we don't,
we're not going to have to worry
about building
more beds to try and treat
people. We're going
to have to start building more
coffins.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And photographer
and MacArthur
grant winner LaToya Ruby Frazier
on why she
documents her struggling
hometown.
LATOYA RUBY FRAZIER,
Photographer: I'm not
saying that it's a dying town.
I'm saying
that we survived. Like, look at
all of the
damage, all the abuse we have
endured, and
we're still steadfast and
existing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The president was
by turns
tearful and tough today, as he
pushed a plan
to regulate more gun sales. He
said he's targeting
transactions at shows and flea
markets because
Congress is afraid to cross the
gun lobby.
The National Rifle Association
answered that
the proposals are -- quote --
"ripe for abuse."
We will have the story in full
after the news
summary.
In the day's other news, an
American soldier
died in a firefight in Southern
Afghanistan.
Two other U.S. service members
were wounded,
along with several Afghan
soldiers. Pentagon
officials said it happened in
Helmand Province,
and the fighting continued for
hours.
PETER COOK, Pentagon Press
Secretary: There
is fighting on the ground as we
speak, which
is why it's hard for us to have
every single
detail as to what's transpired,
and there's
been an effort once again, as I
mentioned
before, to make sure that
everything's being
done to secure the safety of
those Americans
and the Afghan forces that
they're accompanying
in this particular situation in
Helmand.
JUDY WOODRUFF: U.S. special
operations forces
have been working with Afghan
troops in Helmand
in recent weeks to repel new
Taliban attacks.
Fighting in Yemen returned to
full pitch today,
just days after a shaky truce
ended. Shiite
rebels blasted the city of Marib
with a rocket
barrage, while Saudi Arabia
launched new airstrikes
in a series of cities, including
Sanaa. Residents
of the capital surveyed the
damage today.
Some accused the Saudis of
hitting civilian
targets, including a health
center for the
blind, but there were no
casualties.
In Turkey, an all-too-familiar
scene today,
as the bodies of dozens more
migrants washed
up on shore. Authorities say at
least 36 people
drowned when their boats
capsized in the Aegean
Sea trying to reach Greece.
Turkish crews
found the victims strewn along
beaches. They
also managed to rescue at least
12 others
from the choppy waters, but a
mass migration
agency said the danger has not
deterred people.
JOEL MILLMAN, International
Organization for
Migration: Migrants and refugees
continue
to enter Greece at a rate of
over 2,500 a
day from Turkey, which is very
close to the
average through December, so we
see the migrant
flows are continuing through the
winter, and,
obviously, the fatalities are
continuing as
well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Last year, nearly
3,800 migrants
died trying to reach Europe by
sea.
Back in this country, the gun
control debate
dominated presidential politics
today, with
one exception. Democratic
hopeful Bernie Sanders
went after Wall Street, calling
it an industry
fueled by greed, fraud and
arrogance. He told
a crowd in New York that he'd
break up the
nation's big banks in his first
year in office.
The armed men occupying a
national wildlife
refuge in Oregon now say that
they will stay
until federal officials let
locals manage
the land. They made that demand
today at the
site they have occupied since
Saturday night.
Their leader also dismissed a
sheriff's appeal
that they go home. He said local
people welcome
their presence.
AMMON BUNDY, Armed Protester: We
also appreciate
the advice that the community
members have
given us about how to reach out
and how to
share our message, so that other
community
members will know that we are
not about fear.
We're not about force. We're not
about intimidation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So far, federal
agents have
made no move to physically force
the group
to leave.
2015, it turns out, was a banner
year for
U.S. automakers, the best ever,
in fact. Industry
officials projected today that
nearly 17.5
million vehicles were sold
through December.
That tops the old record set in
2000. General
Motors led the pack with more
than three million
cars and trucks sold.
The stock market struggled to
make any headway
today, after Monday's big
losses. The Dow
Jones industrial average gained
nine points
to close at 17158. The Nasdaq
rose 11 points,
and the S&P 500 added four.
And West Point now has its first
female commandant
of cadets. Brigadier General
Diana Holland
was sworn in today at the United
States Military
Academy. She's a West Point
graduate herself
and a veteran of the Iraq and
Afghanistan
wars. Holland's appointment
comes one month
after the military opened all
combat roles
to women, and 40 years since
West Point admitted
women as cadets.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
the president's
order on guns, too far or not
far enough?;
a view from Tehran as tensions
with Saudi
Arabia escalate; tracing
Benjamin Netanyahu's
path to power; what can be done
to loosen
heroin's grip on New Hampshire;
and much more.
path to power; what can be done
to loosen
heroin's grip on New Hampshire;
and much more.
The president delivered a
lengthy, emotional
speech as he unveiled new steps
today to reduce
gun violence.
Republicans quickly denounced
many of his
remarks, and others wondered
just how much
impact his changes could have in
a country
where Americans own an estimated
300 million
guns.
Victims' families hailed many of
the measures,
and the president argued that --
quote -- "We
maybe cannot save everybody, but
we could
save some."
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
Fort Hood. Binghamton. Aurora.
Oak Creek.
Newtown. The Navy Yard. Santa
Barbara. Charleston.
San Bernardino. Too many.
JUDY WOODRUFF: With that litany
of mass shootings,
President Obama announced his
decision to
use executive action.
BARACK OBAMA: People are dying.
And the constant
excuses for inaction no longer
suffice.
That's why we're here today, not
to debate
the last mass shooting, but to
do something
to try to prevent the next one.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The audience was
filled with
victims of gun violence,
including former
Arizona Congresswoman Gabby
Giffords, who
received a standing ovation when
she arrived.
Standing behind the president
were other survivors
and family members of people
killed by guns
over the past 20 years. They
included parents
of some of the 26 slain at Sandy
Hook Elementary
School in Newtown, Connecticut,
in 2012.
The president was moved to tears
over the
20 children who died there.
BARACK OBAMA: First-graders, and
from every
family who never imagined that
their loved
one would be taken from our
lives by a bullet
from a gun.
one would be taken from our
lives by a bullet
from a gun.
Every time I think about those
kids, it gets
me mad. And, by the way, it
happens on the
streets of Chicago every day.
(APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: After Newtown,
Mr. Obama tried
to get Congress to pass
comprehensive background
checks for gun buyers, but he
failed. Today,
he declared it can't end there.
BARACK OBAMA: So, the gun lobby
may be holding
Congress hostage right now, but
they cannot
hold America hostage.
(APPLAUSE)
BARACK OBAMA: We do not have to
accept this
carnage as the price of freedom.
(APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now he's using
presidential
powers for a limited effort to
expand private
gun sales subject to background
checks.
To do that, the government will
widen the
definition of gun dealers and
sellers to include
gun shows, Web sites and flea
markets. And
the FBI will hire 230 background
check processors
to help strengthen enforcement.
A recent Harvard study found
that up to 40
percent of guns purchased in the
U.S. don't
go through any background checks
at all.
Separately, Mr. Obama called
today for more
research into technologies to
keep guns safe.
BARACK OBAMA: If we can set it
up so you can't
unlock your phone unless you've
got the right
fingerprint, why can't we do the
same thing
for our guns?
(APPLAUSE)
BARACK OBAMA: If a child can't
open a bottle
of aspirin, we should make sure
that they
can't pull a trigger on a gun.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
BARACK OBAMA: Right?
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the
presidential campaign
trail, Republican candidates
roundly rejected
President Obama's actions.
Ted Cruz was in Iowa.
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX),
Presidential Candidate:
I can tell you right now those
executive orders
are not worth the paper they are
printed on,
because, when you live by the
pen, you die
by the pen, and my pen has got
an eraser.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Jeb Bush
spoke in New Hampshire.
JEB BUSH (R), Presidential
Candidate: It's
not going to solve any problems
by having
the so-called gun show loophole
be taken -- taken
care of by executive order. The
president
doesn't have authority to do it.
If there
is an issue related to federal
gun laws, then
he ought to go to Congress and
try to forge
consensus to make it happen. He
doesn't have
this power.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The president had
anticipated
some of the reaction, insisting
he's within
his authority and that he's
upholding the
Second Amendment's right to bear
arms.
BARACK OBAMA: Contrary to the
claims of what
some gun rights proponents have
suggested,
this hasn't been the first step
in some slippery
slope to mass confiscation.
Contrary to claims
of some presidential candidates,
apparently,
before this meeting, this is not
a plot to
take away everybody's guns.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Still, the
president may need
additional funding from Congress
for mental
health care and extra FBI
workers, money the
Republican-controlled Congress
is unlikely
to approve.
Speaker of the House Paul Ryan
made that clear
today in a statement that said
-- quote -- "His
words and actions amount to a
form of intimidation
that undermines liberty."
Meanwhile, gun sales are
soaring. More guns
were sold in December, after the
attacks in
San Bernardino, California, than
almost any
month in the last 20 years.
Let's look at both the symbol
and substance
of what the president announced
today and
what its impact is likely to be.
John Feinblatt is the president
of Everytown
for Gun Safety, which was
created after the
Newtown shootings and supported
in part by
former New York City Mayor
Michael Bloomberg.
And David Kopel, he is research
director at
The Independence Institute. It's
a libertarian
think tank. And he's well --
also an adjunct
professor of constitutional law
at the University
of Denver.
And we welcome both of you.
John Feinblatt, is the president
on the right
track with these moves that he
says are going
to reduce the number of gun
deaths?
JOHN FEINBLATT, Everytown for
Gun Safety:
Yes, I think what the president
did today
was pretty straightforward.
What he did was took some
actions to enforce
laws already on the books. One
was, he clarified
the law, that, if you're in the
business of
selling guns, you need to get a
license and
do a background check.
And the second is, he said that
he was going
to devote the resources to
enforce it. And
I think that, when you combine
clarifying
the law with additional
enforcement resources,
what you're going to do is
interrupt some
commercial sellers who are
actually taking
advantage of loopholes in the
laws, not getting
a license, and selling without
background
checks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David Kopel, do
you -- excuse
me for interrupting.
David Kopel, do you agree the
president is
generally on the right track
with this?
DAVID KOPEL, The Independence
Institute: Well,
I agree with most of what Mr.
Feinblatt just
said, because the president
didn't do anything
at all that changes the law.
He just very forcefully and
passionately restated
what has been the law since
1968, which is,
if you are engaged in the
business, as the
statute says, of selling
firearms, then you
have to have a federal firearms
license. And
of course he's correct that that
mandate is
the same whether you sell in
your basement
or at a gun store or on the
Internet or at
a gun show.
And it's always been like that.
So, he restated
it. He didn't change anything,
but I think
it's fine to remind people who
might not know
about that requirement that it
exists.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, John
Feinblatt, it's really
not that much of a change? It's
just a matter
of enforcing what was already
there?
JOHN FEINBLATT: Look, the law
has been blurry.
It's always -- the law has been,
if you're
engaged in the business of
selling guns, you
need to get a license and do
background checks.
But the problem was that there
was never any
meat on the bone. So, people
didn't know what
engaged in the business actually
meant. And
so what the president did today,
which was
very significant, was, he
actually indicated
what would be the criteria to
know whether
you were engaged in business.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What are some of
those criteria?
JOHN FEINBLATT: So, did you buy
a gun and
recently resell it? And, so,
clearly, you're
in it for commerce. It's not
part of your
own collection? It is new in the
box with
price tags already on it?
Are you -- do you have business
cards printed
that actually show that you're
repeatedly
selling guns? Are you showing up
at gun shows
month after month? Things like
that. They're
commonsense, but they are very
important,
because what they're offering is
guidance
to both law enforcement and to
people who
are selling guns about who needs
to get a
license and who doesn't.
And then by saying that he would
put enforcement
might behind it, what I think
will happen
is that you will see dealers
becoming licensed,
doing background checks, where,
heretofore,
they hadn't.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, David Kopel,
just spelling
out some of these specifics
could lead to
a reduction in gun deaths?
DAVID KOPEL: Well, it will lead
to the public
being better informed.
I read the guidance document
that the ATF
published today. And it was
fine. It adhered
very closely to the statutory
definition enacted
by Congress and then provided
some examples.
And part of what it did was
based on court
cases interpreting the statute.
So, that's good. And I think it
will lead
to more people getting federal
firearms licenses,
which is necessary to be engaged
in the business
of selling guns, because what
the president
is doing is implicitly reversing
a Clinton
era policy, which was to revoke
dealers' licenses
because, supposedly, they
weren't selling
enough guns to count as being
engaged in the
business.
So, 200,000 people lost their
firearms licenses
under the Clinton administration
program,
so, hopefully, this is a step to
restore those
licenses that probably never
should have been
taken away.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David Kopel, what
about some
of the other things the
president is talking
about, spending more money on
mental health,
making mental health treatment
more available,
spending money to advance
research to make
guns safer in the hands of
children? What
about those things? Will those
make a difference?
DAVID KOPEL: Oh, the mental
health is really
important, and we, as a country,
tend to only
focus on it when there's these
notorious crimes
committed by a severely mentally
ill person.
But just on a day-to-day basis,
one out of
five prisoners in state prisons
for homicide
is seriously mentally ill. And,
of course,
people with mental illness are
victimized
by violent crime at a much
higher rate than
the general population.
So, I applaud the president for
putting resources
towards that, and that's
something we ought
to be working on constantly. And
both sides
of the gun debate ought to be
able to come
together to support helping
mentally ill people,
not stigmatizing them, not
having punitive
harsh laws against people, but
just giving
people treatment resources.
JUDY WOODRUFF: John Feinblatt,
given the fact
that, I mean, just at least the
two of you
agree, coming from somewhat
different places
on this, how do you explain the
very vocal
opposition out there?
(CROSSTALK)
JOHN FEINBLATT: Well, it's
interesting, because
it's not just me and David. It's
actually
90 percent of Americans.
So, 90 percent of Americans
believe in universal
background checks. Gun owners
believe in it.
Even NRA members, 74 percent of
NRA members
do. And so this is what the
American public
actually wants. And the
president is taking
steps to do it.
You know, for years, we have
heard these issues
that, if the president acts,
he's going to
take people's guns away, he's
confiscating
guns, it's a slippery slope. And
I think David
and I agree that background
checks can save
lives. Americans believe in it.
And all the president is really
doing today
is enforcing the laws already on
the books,
which is what people who oppose
any efforts
at gun safety always say: Why
don't you just
enforce the laws on the books?
So, it's surprising to hear that
today, when,
in fact, what the president has
done is exactly
what people have called for.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, David Kopel,
though, is
there more the president -- is
there more
-- what more could -- let me put
it this way.
What more could Congress do to
make it harder
for a gun to be in the hands of
someone who
is going to commit a terrible
crime?
DAVID KOPEL: Well, I think as
Mr. Feinblatt
said, enforcing existing laws.
The -- we have cases where
people have been
straw purchasers. That's
somebody where you're
a legal buyer, but you're buying
on behalf
of someone else, so that they
can avoid the
background check and get the
gun. And that's
a very common way that criminals
get guns.
And the background check system
can't stop
that.
And the Obama administration's
prosecution
of straw purchase cases has been
very lax,
especially compared to the
previous administration.
JOHN FEINBLATT: So, the most
important thing
that you can do is pass
universal background
checks.
Eighteen states have passed
universal background
checks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Which the U.S.
doesn't have.
We don't have that now.
JOHN FEINBLATT: Which the U.S.
doesn't have.
But we're going -- we're moving
state by state.
And in the past year or two, you
have seen
Oregon, Colorado, Washington
state, in two
cases by the legislature, in one
case by ballot.
And if you look at the states
that have passed
universal background checks, 48
percent fewer
homicides of cops, 48 percent
fewer domestic
homicides with guns, almost half
the amount
of trafficking.
Background checks work. And it's
important
to know that that's the step
that we have
to do. That's the final step
here. It's the
major step.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, David Kopel,
that's not
what the president has done so
far. It's not
what he's doing today. Would
that make a huge
difference in unnecessary gun
deaths, universal
background checks?
DAVID KOPEL: Well, we have one
of these Bloomberg
laws that was passed in
Colorado. And I'm
currently representing most of
the state sheriffs
in federal court in a lawsuit
against it because
it's so badly structured.
It makes it very difficult for
people to teach
gun safety classes. For example,
the Washington
analogue, it's illegal if you're
a gun safety
instructor to hand a gun to a
student empty,
unloaded, and show the student
how to handle
it. Those are -- these are
ridiculous laws.
They're not universal background
checks.
The Colorado law was so badly
structured that
it actually reduced the number
of people getting
background checks because it
made them so
difficult to obtain. So,
whatever polls say
about the theory of background
checks, the
practice and the laws pushed by
Everytown
has been terrible and highly
destructive to
the shooting sports and
responsible gun use.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just quickly, so
it sounds
like, once one gets beyond what
the president
suggested today, you do see
opposition?
JOHN FEINBLATT: You see it, but
you see it
-- certainly, David objects it
to, but every
poll would show that 90 percent
of Americans
believe in universal background
checks, whether
you're a gun owner, whether
you're not a gun
owner, whether you live in a
rural community
or an urban community.
It's what the American public
wants. It's
what the people of Washington
state voted
for on their own at the ballot,
and it's what
state legislatures are passing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, and, today,
we're looking
at what the president did
through his executive
actions.
JOHN FEINBLATT: That's correct.
JUDY WOODRUFF: John Feinblatt,
David Kopel,
we thank you both.
DAVID KOPEL: Thank you.
JOHN FEINBLATT: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The tensions
between Saudi
Arabia and Iran continued to
echo throughout
the Persian Gulf today, as
Kuwait became the
latest Sunni nation to pull its
ambassador
from Tehran, though it didn't
fully cut off
diplomatic ties.
But how is this crisis seen from
Iran?
We go to William Brangham for
that.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: For more on
the story, I'm
now joined on the phone by
Thomas Erdbrink,
who is the New York Times bureau
chief in
Tehran.
So, Thomas, Saudi Arabia
executes this Shiite
cleric, Nimr al-Nimr. Protests
in Iran against
the Saudis get out of hand, and
the Saudi
Embassy in Iran is destroyed.
You reported
this morning that the government
likely instigated
those initial protests, but did
they want
it to get as far out of hand as
it did?
THOMAS ERDBRINK, The New York
Times: Just
today, one of the heads of the
Iranian Revolutionary
Guard Corps told to the Fars
News Agency that
what happened at the embassy was
completely
unjustifiable, it should have
never have happened,
and he was sure that his troops
were not involved.
And we have been hearing similar
comments
from other people in the Iranian
establishment,
which is clearly a sign that
either they feel
the protests have gone too far
or, of course,
they have been shocked by the
level of blowback
from Saudi Arabia, and are now
trying to do
some damage control.
The focus completely shifted
toward them because
of their own actions. And this
is what actually
the Iranian officials are
telling me off the
record: Look, we don't like to
admit it, but
we shoved ourselves to the front
by doing
this.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: You report
that this crisis
comes at a time when Iran was
really hoping
to emerge as a growing power in
the Middle
East. They just signed a nuclear
deal. Sanctions
were soon to be eased. President
Rouhani was
hoping to be celebrating, not be
dealing with
this.
So, what does this mean for him
and for other
reformers in Iran?
THOMAS ERDBRINK: Well, of
course, Mr. Rouhani
came to power with the promise
of mending
relations with other countries.
The historic nuclear deal was a
clear example
of his administration going out,
negotiating
for two -- for two full years,
and then getting
Iran a deal that its supreme
leader, Ayatollah
Khamenei, could sign off on. So,
that, by
itself, was a major boost for
President Rouhani.
But, of course, now, in a time
that he was
hoping to see the result of
those negotiations,
and sanctions are about to be
lifted in the
coming days or weeks, he is
faced with the
remains of the Saudi Arabian
Embassy.
And several countries, Bahrain,
the United
Arab Emirates and two other
nations have either
completely disconnected their
diplomatic relations
with Iran or have at least
seriously downgraded
them.
So, for President Rouhani, this
is a setback.
At the same time, he is trying
literally to
come out with a more positive
spin on this.
He's been condemning, like many
other officials,
what happened at the embassy.
And, of course,
the Iranians are hoping that, in
the long
run, it will be, in the end,
Saudi Arabia
that will come out as the bad
guy, if you
will, out of this.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Let's look a
little bit
more broadly in the region. Does
this jeopardize
the larger diplomatic
initiatives that Iran
was involved in, the talks about
ending the
Syrian civil war and the
fighting in Yemen?
What does this crisis do to
those efforts?
THOMAS ERDBRINK: Well, it's
absolutely a major
obstacle.
And let's face it. Iran is a
player in those
two theaters that you mentioned.
It allegedly
supports the Houthi rebels in
Yemen. And,
of course, it supports President
Bashar al-Assad
in Syria.
Iran has just, through
negotiations, gotten
so far that it was invited in
these major
talks that we're seeing every
couple months
on Saudi Arabia. The next one is
about the
take place on January 25. But
now the whole
debate has shifted towards the
relationship
between Iran and Saudi Arabia,
instead of
solving the crisis inside Syria.
So, if that meeting will still
happen on the
25th, will the -- will Saudi
Arabia allow
it? Will Iran go along as it is
now? Because
we don't know how this will spin
out of control.
So all and all, this is a major
obstacle to
peace in Syria and Yemen.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Again, does
this indicate
that the Saudis intentionally
killed Nimr
now to incite this very reaction
and set back
the talks because they didn't
like the way
they were heading?
THOMAS ERDBRINK: Well,
absolutely.
That's what the Iranians will
also tell you.
They feel as if a trap was laid
out for them,
and they sort of stepped in it
with their
eyes closed.
The view of the Iranians is that
Saudi Arabia
has always been their regional
competitor.
So, whenever there is a conflict
involving
a Shia minority, or, for
instance, the execution
of this Shia ayatollah in Saudi
Arabia, the
Iranians feel as if the Saudis
are actually
trying to hurt them.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Thomas
Erdbrink of The New
York Times, thank you very much.
THOMAS ERDBRINK: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: One additional
fallout from
the U.S.-led nuclear deal with
Iran, the growing
rift with longtime ally Israel.
Tonight's "Frontline" explores
the rise to
power of Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu.
Back in 2013, the Obama
administration held
secret talks with Tehran. Israel
wasn't happy
to be left in the dark.
NARRATOR: Just as outlines of a
secret deal
became public, Secretary of
State John Kerry
made a stopover in Israel.
Netanyahu rushed
to Ben-Gurion Airport for a
face-to-face meeting
with Kerry.
TZACHI HANEGBI, Netanyahu
Adviser: We felt
it's ridiculous, unjustified,
immoral. It
will be more of the same and
worse than the
same.
NARRATOR: While Kerry waited in
the first-class
lounge, Netanyahu stopped for a
word with
the press.
BENJAMIN NETANYAHU, Israeli
Prime Minister:
I understand the Iranians are
walking around
very satisfied, as well they
should be, because
they got everything and paid
nothing. This
is a very bad deal. And Israel
utterly rejects
it.
NARRATOR: Then Netanyahu headed
for Kerry.
He didn't hold back.
MARTIN INDYK, Former U.S. Envoy
to Middle
East: It was just Kerry and
Netanyahu, but
I was outside the room. And I
could hear it.
I could hear it. That's for
sure.
He had a really strong sense of
betrayal.
He was furious. When Bibi gets
upset, he starts
screaming and pounding the
table. And so it
was one of those moments.
NARRATOR: But he wasn't done.
Before leaving,
Netanyahu went before the
cameras one more
time.
BENJAMIN NETANYAHU: This is a
bad deal, a
very, very bad deal. It's the
deal of the
century for Iran. It's a very
dangerous and
bad deal for peace and the
international community.
NARRATOR: Later that day,
Netanyahu summoned
Obama's former adviser Dennis
Ross.
DENNIS ROSS, Former U.S. Envoy
to Middle East:
Bibi asked me to come and see
him on Friday
evening at his -- at the prime
minister's
residence.
So, it's Shibadi (ph) and me.
And I get there,
and I have to wait about close
to an hour
because he's on the phone with
the president.
NARRATOR: In an emergency phone
call from
Air Force One, Obama tried to
calm Netanyahu
down and persuade him that a
deal with Iran
would make Israel safer. But it
didn't work.
DENNIS ROSS: As many times as I
have dealt
with Bibi, I had never seen him
this way.
He wasn't angry, but he was --
the only way
I can put it is that he was
feeling alarmed,
not angry, but alarmed.
And the first thing he says to
me is, "The
president decided he has no
choice but to
do a deal with the Iranians.
Force is off
the table."
And I said, "He didn't say that
to you."
He said, "He did."
I said, "No, he didn't say that
to you."
He said, "He did."
NARRATOR: Netanyahu believes the
Iranians
would only respond to the threat
of force.
To him, if that wasn't an
option, Obama was
surrendering to the Iranians.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Watch the entire
film, "Netanyahu
at War," tonight on "Frontline."
Check your
local listing for times.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": a
first for female
students in Afghanistan; and a
MacArthur fellow's
complicated portrait of her
hometown.
MDNM/
But, first, say New Hampshire,
and most people
in the political world think
first-in-the-nation
primary, coming up February 9.
But, these days, there's
another, more disturbing
distinction for the Granite
State, the expectation
that last year's fatal drug
overdoses will
hit a record 400 deaths.
Today, presidential candidates
and state political
leaders gathered for a forum to
tackle addiction
and the growing heroin crisis.
I traveled to New Hampshire last
month to
get a firsthand look at the
epidemic and its
repercussions.
Like the rest of the country,
New Hampshire
has long grappled with its share
of drug abuse.
But, in the past few years, the
easy availability
of cheap heroin and fentanyl,
another opiate,
has exploded into a crisis that
leaders in
both parties say needs urgent
attention.
GOV. MAGGIE HASSAN (D), New
Hampshire: The
opioid epidemic is really our
most pressing
public health and public safety
issue right
now.
DONNA SYTEK (R), Former New
Hampshire House
Speaker: Drug abuse has always
been a challenge
for New Hampshire, but, with the
opioid crisis,
it has reached epic proportions.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Democrats like
Governor Maggie
Hassan and Republicans like the
former Speaker
of the State Assembly Donna
Sytek agree the
state was slow to recognize what
was happening
in front of everyone's eyes.
But there's no mistaking it here
at HOPE for
New Hampshire, where the
holidays mean no
slowdown in people needing help
on their road
to recovery.
HOLLY CEKALA, Hope for New
Hampshire: Some
people are staying busy,
connecting with their
peers, staying in recovery.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The center
provides nonclinical
support for men and women coping
with an alcohol
or drug addiction that in many
cases started
with a painkiller prescribed by
a physician.
HOLLY CEKALA: You can be tall,
short, white,
black. You could speak English,
you could
not. You could be a CEO or you
could be a
homeless vet. And it really just
doesn't discriminate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Director of
recovery supports,
Holly Cekala, herself in
long-term recovery,
told us the center was created
in response
to a growing need in New
Hampshire's largest
city, Manchester.
HOLLY CEKALA: Even if I opened
up six more
treatment centers here, you're
still going
to fill them. And you're still
going to have
a rotation, unless we protect
our investment
in treatment.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The statistics
are staggering.
In 2013, New Hampshire saw 192
drug overdose
deaths. That number shot up to
326 in 2014.
As of mid-December, 342 people
died this past
year. And the fatalities are
just the tip
of the iceberg.
LINDA SAUNDERS PAQUETTE,
Executive Director,
New Futures: We have a
population in New Hampshire
of about 1.3 million people. And
approximately
100,000 folks are in need of
substance use
treatment.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Linda Saunders
Paquette is
the executive director of New
Futures, a group
that advocates for drug and
alcohol abuse
prevention and reduction.
LINDA SAUNDERS PAQUETTE: With
those high rates
of people with substance use
disorder, we
are also second to last in the
country when
it comes to somebody in need of
treatment
being able to access
Access is an issue state
Representative Gladys
Johnsen saw firsthand almost a
decade ago.
GLADYS JOHNSEN (D), New
Hampshire State Representative:
It's really a disease. And I had
not owned
that until I witnessed it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Years before she
became a state
legislator, the father of
Johnsen's grandson
fatally overdosed in their home.
GLADYS JOHNSEN: My daughter
Jorinda (ph) comes
running upstairs at 5:15. "I
can't wake Jesse
(ph). I can't wake Jesse."
And we, of course, rushed down
there. And
Jesse was gone. And we --
immediately, my
husband did the chest
compressions, and I
tried breathing in his mouth.
And I knew in
my heart he was gone. And so,
you know, it
has taken me a long time. And he
wasn't -- they
weren't married, but he was one
of mine.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Johnsen says just
weeks before
Jesse's death, he had tried to
get help for
his addiction.
GLADYS JOHNSEN: It still hurts
my soul. I
watched him call place after
place after place
after place, saying: "I really
need help.
Can you find me a place?" And he
could not
find a place because he didn't
have any money.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Bryan Patriquin,
an intern
at HOPE for New Hampshire, told
us that although
he has gotten help throughout
his four years
of recovery, stories like
Jesse's are all
too common.
BRYAN PATRIQUIN, HOPE for New
Hampshire: If
we were to walk down the streets
of Manchester,
it would be a matter of time
before we saw
a drug deal happen. But if you
call a treatment
center right now, you're going
to get a waiting
list for four to six weeks, on
average.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The drug crisis
here is not
just happening behind closed
doors. Among
the cans and bottles littering
the state's
parks and little league fields,
authorities
have found lots of drug
paraphernalia, including
hundreds of needles.
Drug abuse is such a problem,
that Manchester's
mayor, Ted Gatsas, says he has
regular visits
from parents of young people
who've overdosed
on opioids like heroin and
fentanyl.
TED GATSAS (R), Mayor of
Manchester, New Hampshire:
We need to do something about
it. If we don't,
we're not going to have to worry
about building
more beds to try and treat
people. We're going
to have to start building more
coffins.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Governor Maggie
Hassan has
presented her own set of
proposals to combat
the opioid crisis. It seems
likely the legislature
will adopt at least some of
them.
GOV. MAGGIE HASSAN: The most
important thing
we know we need to do is
increase access to
treatment in New Hampshire, and
that really
boils down to making sure we
reauthorize our
Medicaid expansion program,
because, for the
first time, under Medicaid
expansion, the
Medicaid program covers
treatment and behavioral
health issues.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Realizing drug
abuse has become
an issue important to New
Hampshire, the presidential
hopefuls have also responded.
JEB BUSH (R), Presidential
Candidate: Look,
I have some personal experience
with this
just as a dad. It's the most
heartbreaking
thing in the world to have to go
through.
GOV. CHRIS CHRISTIE (R-NJ),
Presidential Candidate:
My friend, they found him dead
in a motel
room by himself with an empty
bottle of Percocet
and an empty quart of vodka. He
was 52 years
old. My friend had every success
in the world,
as we define it, and then,
because of his
addiction, he had nothing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: State
Representative Johnsen
raised the drug crisis at a
Clinton campaign
event.
GLADYS JOHNSEN: We are
grandparents raising
our 10-year-old grandson,
because his father,
we lost him to an overdose.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
Well, I have to say, Gladys,
that you're the
third grandmother that I have
personally met
in New Hampshire in the last
several months
who is raising a grandchild
because of drugs.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Donna Sytek, who
recently endorsed
New Jersey Governor Chris
Christie, says the
debate now lies in how to solve
the problem.
DONNA SYTEK: When budgets get
tight, that's
one area where there are
cutbacks. And so
it has been a problem. There
hasn't been a
lot of money. It's not
surprising that New
Hampshire doesn't spend a lot on
that. We
don't spend a lot on a lot of
other programs,
because we believe in small
government.
JUDY WOODRUFF: This is, after
all, the state
with the motto "Live Free or
Die."
Even so, Republican Mayor Gatsas
is in favor
of spending more on law
enforcement to tackle
the crisis.
TED GATSAS: We need to start
from the top,
and preventing folks from
getting addicted
by preventing the cross-line of
heroin coming
across into this state.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Governor Hassan,
who is backing
Hillary Clinton for president,
argues the
state investment in treatment is
not only
the right thing to do for
addicts, but also
in the best interest of the
business community.
GOV. MAGGIE HASSAN: This has got
a huge economic
impact. We have a 3.2 percent
unemployment
rate in New Hampshire. It's one
of the lowest
in the country. If we can't find
a work force
that isn't struggling with an
addiction problem,
that has a direct economic
impact on us.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Advocates say
that understanding
addiction and eliminating its
stigma should
go hand in hand with treatment.
LINDA SAUNDERS PAQUETTE: In the
past, a person
who had an addiction was thought
to have a
moral failing. But thanks to
science, we now
know that addiction is a chronic
relapsing
brain disease.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's
exactly what HOPE
for New Hampshire stresses to
politicians
and to those struggling with
addiction.
BRYAN PATRIQUIN: At 21
years-old, I was well
over 500 pounds. I was unhealthy
and a daily
substance user. I found this
group of people
who I still -- still see today
-- I'm sorry
-- it's like really kind of an
emotional thing.
It's an emotional thing for me.
And they stuck
behind me and they supported me.
HOLLY CEKALA: I believe that if
I had a place
like this to come to when I was
struggling
with my addiction, it would have
taken me
much less time to put my life
back together.
That's why I do what I do.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now a different
look at the
war in Afghanistan, through the
lens of inspiring
young women, making history by
way of education.
Last year, we brought you the
story of the
Zabuli girls school about 100
miles north
of Kabul. Just before Christmas,
the first
class graduated.
Beth Murphy of The GroundTruth
Project has
their story.
BETH MURPHY, The GroundTruth
Project: Winter
in Afghanistan signals that the
school year
is ending. In this village, this
unprecedented
graduation comes at a difficult
time in the
country.
RAZIA JAN, Founder, Zabuli
Education Center:
Today is a very special day for
us. It is
beyond my thoughts, beyond my
dreams that
we will be sitting here with our
first graduating
class.
(APPLAUSE)
BETH MURPHY: This is the first
time girls
in this village have ever
graduated from high
school. When the Zabuli
Education Center opened
in 2008, the villagers wanted it
to be a boys
school. But attitudes here have
changed.
RAZIA JAN: This is our first
young woman who
get married and she is still in
school. And
RAZIA JAN: This is our first
young woman who
get married and she is still in
school. And
she wants to continue her
education.
(APPLAUSE)
MAN (through translator): And
thanks to the
people of this village, who
really supported
and helped the school. Without
your help,
this wouldn't be possible.
RAZIA JAN (through translator):
And, also,
you really helped us. Without
your help, this
wouldn't be possible.
MUHAMMAD MALANGATAYE,
Afghanistan (through
translator): It is my duty, and
I feel a strong
responsibility. These are our
students, and
they are like my daughters.
Coming to this
ceremony will help convince them
to continue
their education, and also help
to convince
their parents.
BETH MURPHY: This first
graduation followed
many of the traditions you would
expect, parents
overcome with pride and lots of
time spent
reminiscing.
RAZIA JAN: You have opened a
door that, at
one time, I couldn't even
imagine. This is
RAZIA JAN: You have opened a
door that, at
one time, I couldn't even
imagine. This is
truly a dream come true.
BETH MURPHY: Highlights from
their high school
years include field trips to
Kabul, videoconference
calls with girls in
Massachusetts, where Razia
called home in the U.S., and the
groundbreaking
of the Razia Jan Institute, that
will allow
them to go to college right in
their own village.
Despite the successes,
challenges remain.
RAZIA JAN: When we started,
there was great
hope that things will get
better. But within
these eight years, things have
gone worse.
Many schools have been burned.
Many girls
have been poisoned. Believe me,
we are very
cautious. We can't put our
guards down.
BETH MURPHY: 2015 has not been a
good year
for Afghanistan. According to a
new Pentagon
report, things have gotten worse
since Afghan
forces took over the U.S. and
NATO-led mission
one year ago. Taliban attacks in
Kabul alone
jumped nearly 30 percent.
ROUALLAH SAHIB, Mayor of Deh
Sabz District
(through translator): The
security of this
village is better than a lot of
places, because,
here, we support the government
and police.
We are supporting them. The
international
community and Obama decided to
get out of
the country. They decided to
leave. At the
time, ISIS wasn't in Afghanistan
and the Taliban
was weak. But now ISIS is here,
is getting stronger.
BETH MURPHY: Stronger and more
deadly, 54
people dead after a 24-hour
Taliban assault
on the Kandahar Airport, an
attack that was
staged from a nearby school, and
then another
attack.
MAN (through translator): There
was an explosion
here. It was really powerful.
And right after
the blast, this area was
shaking.
BETH MURPHY: Amidst all the
danger, graduation,
a pocket of relative peace and a
success to
celebrate, it's the kind of
investment the
U.S. wants to protect and a
reason for troops
to remain on the ground.
The administration made an
about-face on pulling
U.S. troops, a recognition that
there's no
end in sight to increased
threats from insurgent
and terrorist groups.
President Obama announced the
change in October.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
I have decided to maintain our
current posture
of 9,800 troops in Afghanistan
through most
of next year, 2016. This modest,
but meaningful
extension of our presence, while
sticking
to our current narrow missions,
can make a
real difference.
ROUALLAH SAHIB (through
translator): Without
their help, we will have more
terrorists here.
Regional security and world
security will
be at risk. We need them to be
here.
RAZIA JAN: America has and other
international
countries have invested so much
here. It is
really something that they
cannot lose completely,
because there are such great
other supreme
powers that will come in a very
passive way,
like Russia and China.
I think America will never
leave. America
is going to be always. I think
there is a
great interest of America in
this country
for their own security.
BETH MURPHY: For the "PBS
NewsHour," I'm Beth
Murphy in Deh Sabz District,
Afghanistan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally, a look
at a photographer's
more-than-decade-long project
documenting
hope and despair in her
hometown.
Jeffrey Brown has that story.
JEFFREY BROWN: Braddock,
Pennsylvania, about
nine miles outside of
Pittsburgh, a once thriving
steel town of some 20,000, now
down to one-tenth
of that, and captured through
the very personal
lens of LaToya Ruby Frazier, the
32-year-old
winner of one of this year's
MacArthur fellowships.
LATOYA RUBY FRAZIER,
Photographer: I see myself
as an artist and a citizen
that's documenting
and telling the story and
building the archive
of working-class families facing
all this
change that's happening, because
it has to
be documented.
JEFFREY BROWN: These days,
Frazier teaches
and lives in Chicago, where we
talked to her,
but her true home, her childhood
home, is
the one found in her work.
It's a project titled "The
Notion of Family"
that she began more than a
decade ago, documenting
three generations of
African-American women
in a particular time and place.
LATOYA RUBY FRAZIER: My
grandmother, who grew
up there in the '30s, when
Braddock was prosperous
and a city itself that everyone
came to, to
my mother growing up there in
the '60s during
segregation and white flight and
the beginning
of the collapse of the steel
industry, to
myself growing up there in the
'80s and '90s,
when the factories were already
dismantled
and the war on drugs kind of hit
its peak.
JEFFREY BROWN: Educator and
photographer Lewis
Hine used his camera for social
reform. Photographers
from the Farm Security
Administration documented
the poverty of the Depression,
the pioneering
work of Gordon Parks in the
1940s and '50s.
Frazier sees herself working in
this tradition,
first and foremost, though, as a
visual artist.
LATOYA RUBY FRAZIER: The art
comes in with
how it's crafted, how it's made,
the material,
me understanding the history,
because the
images, they're not purely
documents.
If you look at them, first and
foremost, the
fact that I appear on the other
side of the
camera lets you know that this
is contemporary
art, because now I'm performing
and doing
gestures in front of the camera
to create...
JEFFREY BROWN: You're part of
the scene.
LATOYA RUBY FRAZIER: ... the
narrative and
the scene, yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: But are they
posed photographs?
LATOYA RUBY FRAZIER: They sit in
between staged
and documentation.
If we think about the image
"Grandma Ruby
and Me, 2005," I know her
routine. I know
she will get up, she will have
her Folgers
cup of coffee, she will smoke
her Pall Mall
cigarettes, she will clean her
dolls.
So, looking at my grandmother
one day, I said,
well, grandma, could you redo my
hair the
way you used to when I was a
child?
So, I'm in my 20s in this image.
So, I come
and I sit next to her while
she's rearranging
her dolls. And then we both
quietly happen
to look over our shoulders, and
the cable
release is running behind to the
camera, and
I press the cable release.
And so that's how it sits
between documentation
and actual staged portraiture.
JEFFREY BROWN: In 2013, Frazier
flew in a
helicopter above Braddock to
expand her view
of the town.
LATOYA RUBY FRAZIER: I just knew
I had to
shoot this, so the family could
see what was
happening to their property.
JEFFREY BROWN: And to capture
the plight of
one particular home owned by the
Bunn family
in the neighborhood known as The
Bottom, right
near the old plant. It's now
surrounded by
bundles of crushed rubber tires.
LATOYA RUBY FRAZIER: And what's
interesting
is, at one point, anyone who
immigrated or
migrated to work in this factory
lived exactly
these two blocks.
JEFFREY BROWN: Really?
LATOYA RUBY FRAZIER: And this is
really important
to me because it's not about
being black or
white. This was our rites of
passage, so it
didn't matter if you came from
Germany, Croatia,
Italy, Africa, North Carolina,
or South Carolina.
We all lived here together.
And over the years, these were
all, through
eminent domain, taken because
people died
from terminal illnesses,
couldn't upstand
or keep their homes. And then
this family,
the Bunn family, decided that
they didn't
want to move.
JEFFREY BROWN: In more recent
years, a new
story of Braddock has been told,
one of grit
and revival. Levi's even used
the city in
a 2010 ad campaign called "Ready
for Work."
CHILD: Maybe the world breaks on
purpose,
so we can have work to do.
JEFFREY BROWN: Frazier isn't
buying it.
LATOYA RUBY FRAZIER: Out of
concern for this
narrative and what I saw as
propaganda, I
started to make the portraits to
counterbalance
this narrative. Right. It's not
an empty land.
It's not a frontier. Like,
people actually
live here and have been dealing
with the environmental
crisis for decades.
JEFFREY BROWN: She points to
government policies
and corporate decisions like the
closing of
the main hospital, which had
served many in
the town, including Frazier's
own family,
who say they suffer from
environment-related
illnesses.
The fight over the hospital was
captured in
a 2012 documentary by Tony Buba,
who's been
filming life in Braddock since
the 1970s.
The protests became another
point of Frazier's
own mix of art and activism.
LATOYA RUBY FRAZIER: So, here,
I'm talking
about the history of protests.
JEFFREY BROWN: Taken altogether,
it's a complicated
picture. Frazier wants us not to
forget those
who continue to struggle amid
the changes.
LATOYA RUBY FRAZIER: I'm not
saying that it's
a dying town. I'm saying that we
survived.
Like, look at all of the damage,
all the abuse
we have endured, and we're still
steadfast
and existing. So, for me, it's a
triumphant
story. It's really a testimony.
It's not -- we're
not dying.
JEFFREY BROWN: Even though it
looks -- I mean,
much of it looks so depressed
and depressing-type
scenes.
LATOYA RUBY FRAZIER: But look at
me in the
flesh right now in front of you.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
LATOYA RUBY FRAZIER: I'm not
that girl.
JEFFREY BROWN: And she plans to
use the money
from the MacArthur grant,
$625,000 over five
years, to continue to document
and complicate
our picture of Braddock,
Pennsylvania.
I'm Jeffrey Brown for the "PBS
NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online: Five
long years of civil war haven't
stopped Syrian
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online: Five
long years of civil war haven't
stopped Syrian
artists from showing the world
the country
they call home. We talked to two
filmmakers
currently living outside of
Syria on the urgency
of telling their stories of war
and everyday
life. It's part of an ongoing
series highlighting
Syrian artists.
You can find today's story on
our home page.
And El Nino-related weather has
recently battered
the South and the Midwest, but
the trouble
may just be getting started. In
the first
of a two-part science series, we
explore what's
in store for blossoming flower
to the cost
of cookies.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
Tune in later tonight on
"Charlie Rose": Saudi
Arabia, Iran, and the deepening
divide between
Sunni and Shia Muslims.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Wednesday, we will look at
efforts to crack
down on sky-high interest rates
for payday
loans.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening. For all of us at the
"PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.